create single-click Heroku hosting and documenation (#834)
chanzuckerberg/cellxgene: experiments/heroku/README.md

# Heroku Deployment for cell×gene

## Quick Start

Clicking on the following button will forward you to heroku to begin the deployment process

<a href="https://heroku.com/deploy?template=https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene/tree/heroku">
  <img src="https://www.herokucdn.com/deploy/button.svg" alt="Deploy">
</a>

If not already logged in to heroku, there you will be prompted to login or sign up for an account.

Once logged in you will be sent to the setup page. Here you can set some of the basic settings for the app:

#### Default Settngs

- `App name`: the unique name name for your deployment.
  - This will also serve as the default url (e.g. https://cellxgene.herokapp.com/)
- `App owner`: Who will own this app. Either you personally or an organiziation/team
- `Region`: Location of server where app will be deployed (EU or US)

> #### Config Vars

Reviewer: Maybe just Configuration? because it's heroku/cellxgene config.

- `DATASET`: A _publicly_ accessable URL pointing to a .h5ad file to view
  - This is defaulted to pbm3k.h5ad

After filling out the settings and pressing the `Deploy app` button heroku will begin building your deployment. This process will take a few minutes, but once completed you will have a personal free hosted version of cell×gene!

> ## What Is Heroku and Why Should I Use It?

Reviewer: break this up: 
1 what is heroku?
2 why would I want to deploy cellxgene on heroku?

I think there is a little more to be written here to be clear about why a user would want to deploy on heroku. Maybe you can work with @sidneymbell to rephrase.

> ## What Is Heroku and Why Should I Use It?

Reviewer 2: Thanks for putting this together! This is a great start. Keeping in mind that web development / deployment is not something that many computational biologists have any experience with, I think there are some opportunities to expand.

Suggested revisions:
Section on "What is Heroku?":
1 - Please remove the quote and expand the summary of Heroku for the layperson ("Heroku is a service offered by Amazon to host applications on the web...")
2 - Make it clear why cellxgene needs something like heroku ("Cellxgene currently can't be hosted as a static web page because...."); include the idea that it needs a container.
3 - Make it clear that Heroku is one of several available options for hosting an application like cellxgene. 

Section on "When is Heroku a good option?"
1 - Current text is generally great. 
2 - Please revise this sentence:
"If you want to quickly deploy an instance of cellxgene and, if not using a small dataset, okay with paying for a tiered dyno, this is a viable solution." --> 
"This is a good option if you want to quickly deploy an instance of cellxgene to the web. Heroku deployments are free for small datasets up to XX size. See below regarding larger datasets."

Author: 👍

> Heroku is a cloud platform that lets companies build, deliver, monitor and scale apps — we're the fastest way to go from idea to URL, bypassing all those infrastructure headaches.

A Heroku deployment of cell×gene means that the app is not running on your local machine. Instead, the app is installed, configured, and ran on the Heroku servers (read: cloud).

What this enables is a quick, non-technical method of setting up a cell×gene instance. No command line knowledge needed. This also allows machines anywhere to access the instance, so sharing a visualized dataset is as simple as sharing a link.

If you want to quickly deploy an instance of cellxgene and, if not using a small dataset, okay with paying for a tiered dyno, this is a viable solution.

> ## Why Shouldn't I Use It?

Reviewer 2: Thanks for explaining this! I learned some things :)
Quick note: "dyno" is confusing to a heroku newbie.

Existing text is generally good. Some minor suggested rephrasing:
>"When is Heroku maybe not a great option?"
>There are 3 main limitations to hosting with Heroku:
>1 - Hosting deployments of cellxgene with h5ad files larger than about 512MBs will require a paid container. You can find more information about these costs [here](). Note that this can become quite expensive for large datasets!

>2 - Because of cellxgene's client-server model (see above), having multiple simultaneous users requires more memory. This means that the free container size is easily overwhelmed by multiple users, even with small datasets; this can be addressed by purchasing a larger container size.

>3 - Your dataset must be publicly available to use this one-click deployment method. (can we link to a guide they can follow if they want to set it up themselves?)

Reviewer: Minor edit on 2 to make us look better :) 
2 - Having multiple simultaneous users requires more memory. This means that the free container size is easily overwhelmed by multiple users, even with small datasets; this can be addressed by purchasing a larger container size.

> - The default free dyno offered by Heroku is limited in memory to 512 MBs

Reviewer: Free is also limited to 30 minutes of active time and then has to go through setup again. This leads to long load times when accessing the app after a long pause.

Author: Are you sure about active time? I only know about this caveat:

>Free apps sleep automatically after 30 mins of inactivity to conserve your dyno hours

Reviewer: You're right, I meant _in_active time.  But that should go into the doc.

Author: added

>   - Heroku offers tiered paid dynos. More can be found [here](https://www.heroku.com/pricing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Heroku offers tiered paid dynos. More can be found [here](https://www.heroku.com/pricing)
```

>   - The amount of memory needed for the dyno is equal to the the size of the h5ad file

Reviewer: Not exactly true, there is some overhead. Maybe `roughly equivalen to the size`t?

>   - This can get _very_ expensive for larger datasets

Reviewer: Maybe add current price for larger memory?

Author: On the larger memory sizes, the price varies a large amount, should I just give the max price or should I just refrain from putting a dollar amount

Reviewer: Put min with a + at the end.

# cellxgene cloud deployment with Heroku

## Quickstart

> Clicking on the following button will forward you to Heroku to begin the deployment process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking on the following button will forward you to Heroku to begin the deployment process:
```

<a href="https://heroku.com/deploy?template=https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene/tree/heroku">
  <img src="https://www.herokucdn.com/deploy/button.svg" alt="Deploy">
</a>

If not already logged in to Heroku, there you will be prompted to log in or sign up for an account.

Once logged in you will be sent to the setup page. Here you can set some of the basic settings for the app:

#### Default settings

> - `App name`: the unique name for your deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `App name`: the unique name for your deployment
```

  - This will also serve as the default URL (e.g. https://cellxgene.herokapp.com/)
- `App owner`: Who will own this app. Either you personally or an organization/team
- `Region`: Location of the server where the app will be deployed (EU or US)

#### Configuration

- `DATASET`: A _publicly_ accessible URL pointing to a .h5ad file to view
  - This defaults to pbm3k.h5ad

> After filling out the settings and pressing the `Deploy app` button Heroku will begin building your deployment. This process will take a few minutes, but once completed you will have a personal free hosted version of cell×gene!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After filling out the settings and pressing the `Deploy app` button Heroku will begin building your deployment. This process will take a few minutes, but once completed you will have a personal free hosted version of cellxgene!
```

Reviewer: Right now we aren't using the multiplication symbol in text so if we are going to switch, I want to do this everywhere at once instead of having inconsistency.

## What is Heroku

> Heroku is a service provided by Salesforce which offers a quick and easy substitute for hosting applications on the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heroku quick and easy way to host applications on the cloud. It is run by Salesforce and offers a free tier for small applications.
```

Author: not too sure about the way this second sentence flows.   I can reword it, but I'm cloudy on the reasoning behind the diff

Reviewer: Yeah, it's clunky. You can remove it if you want.

Reviewer: Just wanted to get the Salesforce + extra words out of the first sentence before we get to you host applications on heroku.

> A Heroku deployment of cell×gene means that the app is not running on your local machine. Instead, the app is installed, configured, and ran on the Heroku servers (read: cloud).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Heroku deployment of cellxgene means that the app is not running on your local machine. Instead, the app is installed, configured, and ran on the Heroku servers (read: cloud).
```

Heroku is one of many options available for hosting instances of cellxgene on the web.
Some other options include: Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud Platform, Digital Ocean, and Microsoft Azure

> ## Why should I use Heroku to deploy cellxgene?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why use Heroku to deploy cellxgene?
```

> Because cellxgene currently heavily relies on its Python backend for providing the client with the necessary data and tooling, it is currently not possible to host cellxgene as a static webpage via Netlify, AWS, GitHub Pages, etc.

Reviewer: Switch this paragraph with the next one. The next is more important for a scientist to know first, then they why they can't use something else.

> What Heroku enables is a quick, non-technical method of setting up a cell×gene instance. No command line knowledge needed. This also allows machines anywhere to access the instance, so sharing a visualized dataset is as simple as sharing a link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What Heroku enables is a quick, non-technical method of setting up a cellxgene instance. No command line knowledge needed. This also allows machines to access the cellxgene instance on the public internet, so sharing a visualized dataset is as simple as sharing a link.
```

> This is a good option if you want to quickly deploy an instance of cellxgene to the web. Heroku deployments are free for small datasets up to around 500MBs in size. See below regarding larger datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a good option if you want to quickly deploy an instance of cellxgene to the web. Heroku deployments are free for small datasets up to around 250MBs in size. See below regarding larger datasets.
```

Let's be conservative.

## When should I not deploy with Heroku?

- The default free dyno offered by Heroku is limited in memory to 512 MBs
  - The amount of memory needed for the dyno is roughly the same size as the h5ad file
  - Heroku offers tiered paid dynos. More can be found [here](https://www.heroku.com/pricing)
  - Note that this can get _very_ expensive for larger datasets
- On the free dyno, after 30 minutes of inactivity, Heroku will put your app into a hibernation mode. Requiring it to boot up on the next access
- Having multiple simultaneous users requires more memory. This means that the free container size is easily overwhelmed by multiple users, even with small datasets; this can be addressed by purchasing a larger container size.

> - For the dataset to be downloaded onto the distro, your dataset must be hosted on a publicly accessible URL

Reviewer: Add that the hosted cellxgene instance will also be available publicly.

## Quickstart

Clicking on the following button will forward you to Heroku to begin the deployment process:

<a href="https://heroku.com/deploy?template=https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/cellxgene/tree/heroku">
  <img src="https://www.herokucdn.com/deploy/button.svg" alt="Deploy">
</a>

If not already logged in to Heroku, there you will be prompted to log in or sign up for an account.

Once logged in you will be sent to the setup page. Here you can set some of the basic settings for the app:

#### Default settings

- `App name`: the unique name for your deployment
  - This will also serve as the default URL (e.g. https://cellxgene.herokapp.com/)
- `App owner`: Who will own this app. Either you personally or an organization/team
- `Region`: Location of the server where the app will be deployed (EU or US)

#### Configuration

- `DATASET`: A _publicly_ accessible URL pointing to a .h5ad file to view
  - This defaults to pbm3k.h5ad

After filling out the settings and pressing the `Deploy app` button Heroku will begin building your deployment. This process will take a few minutes, but once completed you will have a personal free hosted version of cellxgene!

> ## What is Heroku

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is Heroku?
```

> Heroku is a quick and easy substitute for hosting applications on the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heroku is a quick and easy way to host applications on the cloud.
```
It's not really a substitute, I believe? just managed?

> A Heroku deployment of cellxgene means that the app is not running on your local machine. Instead, the app is installed, configured, and ran on the Heroku servers (read: cloud).

Author: I'm going to steer away from using the word container.  "Container" comes with a few added expectations which aren't always the case.  Heroku created the term dyno specifically to abstract the use of "container": https://www.heroku.com/dynos.  Maybe I can throw that link in somewhere?

> A Heroku deployment of cellxgene means that the app is not running on your local machine. Instead, the app is installed, configured, and ran on the Heroku servers (read: cloud).

Reviewer: I'm leaning towards @seve on this one. @sidneymbell could we define dyno early on (or link to heroku documentation, or have a * with a footnote)? Container means you can use in in other places, whereas dyno is heorku specific and is more akin to an AWS instance than a container.

Heroku is one of many options available for hosting instances of cellxgene on the web.

> Some other options include: Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud Platform, Digital Ocean, and Microsoft Azure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some other options include: Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud Platform, Digital Ocean, and Microsoft Azure.
```

## Why use Heroku to deploy cellxgene?

What Heroku enables is a quick, non-technical method of setting up a cellxgene instance. No command line knowledge needed. This also allows machines to access the instance via the internet, so sharing a visualized dataset is as simple as sharing a link.

Because cellxgene currently heavily relies on its Python backend for providing the client with the necessary data and tooling, it is currently not possible to host cellxgene as a static webpage via Netlify, AWS, GitHub Pages, etc.

This is a good option if you want to quickly deploy an instance of cellxgene to the web. Heroku deployments are free for small datasets up to around 250MBs in size. See below regarding larger datasets.

## When should I not deploy with Heroku?

- The default free dyno offered by Heroku is limited in memory to 512 MBs
  - The amount of memory needed for the dyno is roughly the same size as the h5ad file
  - Heroku offers tiered paid dynos. More can be found [here](https://www.heroku.com/pricing)
  - Note that this can get _very_ expensive for larger datasets

> - On the free dyno, after 30 minutes of inactivity, Heroku will put your app into a hibernation mode. Requiring it to boot up on the next access

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- On the free container, after 30 minutes of inactivity, Heroku will put your app into a hibernation mode. Requiring it to boot up on the next access
```

Please clarify wording: what does "requiring it to boot up on the next access" mean? do I have to do anything, or will it just take longer to load?

Author: Reworded to:
> On the next access Heroku will need time to boot the dyno back online.

> - Having multiple simultaneous users requires more memory. This means that the free container size is easily overwhelmed by multiple users, even with small datasets; this can be addressed by purchasing a larger container size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Having multiple simultaneous users requires more memory. This means that the free container size is easily overwhelmed by multiple users, even with small datasets; this can be addressed by purchasing a larger container size
```
(no periods on other list items)

> - For the dataset to be downloaded onto the distro, your dataset must be hosted on a publicly accessible URL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For this facilitated Heroku deployment to work, your dataset must be hosted on a publicly accessible URL
```

Author: Should we add some wording to emphasize that the datasets aren't sent to CZI or the cellxgene team?

- By default, Heroku publically shares your instance to anyone with the URL.

>   - There are many ways of securing your instance. One quick and simple way is by installing [wwwhisper](https://elements.heroku.com/addons/wwwhisper), a Heroku addon

Reviewer: good add!

Reviewer 2: +1 :)
